Networks Connect Us:

    I am willing to bet that you have used
your phone to get a decent cup of coffee
before. You type cafe, a few places show
up, and you pick one. When you get there
and take your spotting line, you usually
don't stop to wonder why this cafe, why
not the one across the street? You just
order and move on.
We like to think that our choices are
fully our own. But what if something was
quietly steering us? What if there was
already a probability that you will pick
one cafe over another even before
unlocking your phone?
It turns out the networks we are all
part of don't just shape our choices,
they can even predict them.
I will get back to the coffee shop in a
minute, but first let's talk about what
networks actually are. At their core,
networks are just connections showing
relationships between people, places,
and many other things. When we draw a
network, those things are shown as dots,
but network scientists like me call them
nodes. The connections that tie them
together are called links.
This might seem like a simple concept,
yet it's incredible how complex these
networks can get. Just think about the
train and airplane systems connecting
cities and countries, trading routes,
delivering goods all around the globe,
or the water and sewer infrastructure
under our cities. We rarely think about
these networks except when they break.
One delayed flight can cause a ripple of
misconnections. One ship stuck in the
Suez Canal can block global trade for
days. And the reality is that you rely
on these networks in your daily life all
the time, even if you don't see them.
You turn on the lights in your home
thanks to an electrical
network. You drive to work on a
network of roadways and you pay for your
lunch by tapping into a financial
network.
Not to mention our digital networks. We
would be truly lost without internet
connection which in turn links us to
loads of other networks from social
media and dating apps to streaming
services and right healing applications.
When we join these platforms
we become an active part of the network.
One of the many dots or nodes in the
global web of connections.
As a network scientist, my job is to
make these invisible networks visible.
This usually means a mix of collecting
data and writing computer code and
sometimes even sketching formulas on a
whiteboard.
By mapping these hidden connections
between people or things, I can reveal
which links are strong, which links are
weak, who sits at the center, and who is
on the fringes.
And if I have done my job really well, I
can not only describe the network, but I
can even predict what happens next.
A few years ago, I used network science
to predict which characters in Game of
Thrones would survive to the end.
For those of you who are not familiar
with the show, Game of Thrones is famous
for two things: dragons and surprise
deaths. Actually, the author became
infamous for ruthlessly killing off even
the most beloved main characters. Just
when you start to like someone, a few
episodes later, they are gone.
This unpredictability was precisely what
got me curious.
Under the excuse of scientific research,
I set out to map the character network
of the show and use it to predict the
show's ending by following a few simple
steps.
Step one, data.
I used scene by scene episode
transcripts, essentially a character
dialogue database.
Step two, connections. If two characters
appeared in the same scene, I counted
that as a link. Step three, relationship
strength. The more scenes they shared,
the stronger the link.
After carefully executing these steps,
what I got looks like a colorful spider
web where shared screen time turns into
network connections.
By taking a closer look,
um um patterns begin to emerge. The main
curts stand out as the largest nodes and
plot lines cluster into different
segments of the graph. Some characters
are deeply connected
and others bridge between story lines.
[clears throat]
When we turn these patterns into numbers
and feed them into a simple machine
learning model, the results are clear.
The structure of the network, who
connects to whom and how,
predicts untimely deaths with surprising
accuracy.
For example,
my model flagged about eight major
characters as having an almost certain
descendence
and
90% of them were dead by the end of the
series.
Ahead of the season finale, a former
colleague actually used my findings to
enter a bedding pool about the character
survival.
And while he didn't got me in, he still
got me a pizza. So I'm pretty sure he
made a decent profit on those bets.
[laughter]
But the bottom line is in Westeros,
fate wasn't just about luck or bravery,
it was about who you know.
The thing is the methods I used to
predict character killings in Game of
Thrones also work in real life. not for
dragons and queens, but for figuring out
how successful a person or a business
will be.
Let's take a look at one industry as an
example.
I studied the world of DJs by mapping
their collaborations, focusing on DJs
who made it into an annual top 100
ranking over a decade.
I found that the electronic music
industry is split into two by a glass
ceiling at the 20th place. Oldtime
legends like TSTO and Army Firan
reliably holds spots in the top 20 year
after year while the rest of the
industry competes for a spot on the list
somewhere below.
It also turned out that for rising
artists, connecting with big stars is a
double-edged sword. On the one hand, it
boosts their chances of becoming
successful and making it to the top 100.
On the other hand, it almost certainly
guarantees they will never break the
glass ceiling.
This means that the people you choose to
connect with can shape your path or
block it.
Your workplace may lack a proper sound
system, yet it functions a lot like the
world of DJs. In 1973,
a sociologist by the name of Mark Greter
published a famous paper called strength
of weak ties. It showed that it's
usually distant acquaintances, not close
friends, who help us land jobs.
Networks can open doors. Other work on
organizational networks has shown that
networks inside companies often form
silos or bubbles which can become echo
chambers.
These workbased clusters are sometimes
so removed from each other that for
example IT and finance look like they
are not even from the same firm. And
such disconnected networks usually stop
ideas from spreading and people from
advancing in their careers.
And here comes network science and
visual maps like the one about Game of
Thrones.
Without such social maps, we can only
guess where the roadblocks are or who
may be the right connection to new
doors. However, once we know the
networks, we can gain the ability to
consistently take steps forward
and even drive what happens next.
The methods that I've used in my
projects may seem like isolated examples
of using networks to predict outcomes,
but actually this type of work is
happening constantly and on a massive
scale behind the curtains of every major
app on your phone.
Algorithms are tirelessly stitching
together hidden networks of people who
may never even know each other, but
whose clicks and swipes and other
digital breadcrumbs make them similar.
In the end, the algorithms figure us out
based on where we are in these networks.
Netflix, for example, isn't just
observing what we watch. It's learning.
Every time you select a movie or rate
the shows you like helps it adjust and
adapt. Moreover, it's also influenced by
the choices and preferences of many
other Netflix users all around the globe
with tastes similar to yours.
Based on what they like, Netflix
predicts what you will like. Which
brings me back to that coffee place you
searched for.
Yes, you might think that you ended up
there because it was conveniently
located to your next destination or
because it had a four and a half star
rating. And these things probably played
a role.
But your search for a coffee shop also
involved what's known as collaborative
filtering. This is a system that
compares your behavior to others and
suggests places based on what people
like you have enjoyed.
For example, if you and I visited the
same cafes before, the system quietly
assumed that we shared taste and
suddenly your choices influence mine.
You open Google Maps, a few places show
up first, others are highlighted, and
some don't show up at all.
And that's not random. That's networks
at work.
By now, we have seen how networks, most
of them invisible, shape what we do.
Once we see those networks, we can start
using them and not just to predict what
happens next, but to decide how we want
to move forward.
That's the moment we move from passenger
to driver. Think of networks as maps.
Every prediction is one route on the
map, but the reality is that there are
many others. Maps help you find the
shortcuts and the roadblocks you didn't
even know were there.
Because every choice, every new
connection adds to the map and steers
your path from the small things like
your morning coffee to the big things
like your career success.
Choose your next connections wisely.