Video Transcript
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P_188oMgfuQ

If you're looking to set up a home
network for the first time or need help
getting yours up and running, you've
come to the right video. By the end of
this guide, you'll have a clear
step-by-step process to get you started
and to get you finished. That way, you
can build something like this. I'm
Michael Scott, and this is the ultimate
tech hub.
Choosing Your ISP - Internet Service Provider
The first and most important step when
building any home network is choosing
your ISP. And we have three factors to
consider. The first factor is speed. How
fast do you want your uploads and
downloads? So when choosing your speed
for your home network, take into
consideration the size of your family,
what you're doing at home, are you
working from home? Are you a streamer,
gamer, all the above. If you have a
large family and maybe work from home,
then you're probably going to need a one
gig plan. A one gig plan should provide
plenty of speed and bandwidth for
multiple users, which includes streaming
multiple devices, working from home,
gaming, and web browsing. However, if
you're single or maybe you have a small
family and maybe only web browse, then a
slower plan will be just fine. The
second factor you want to consider when
choosing an ISP is reliability. How
reliable is the ISP? Does it have
frequent outages? And are you getting
the speeds that you're paying for? It
can be a common issue when an ISP
advertises one speed, but you're getting
far less. So, make sure to do a speed
test once a week to check those speeds.
And before you sign up with any ISP,
check the reviews. Okay. The third
factor is your budget. How much are you
willing to spend? It's 2025 and ISPs
have now become pretty competitive. So,
pricing is pretty good. When it comes to
picking your ISP, it's all about
location and available options. So, if
you live in the city, you may have more
options. However, if you live rural, you
may have only one option, and that one
option may be Starlink. And Starlink
does have a high rating when it comes to
speed and latency. However, when it
comes to satellite, weather conditions
can disrupt your service. So, keep that
in mind. If at all possible, you want to
opt for a fiber ISP. Unlike cable or
DSL, fiber ISPs offer a faster, more
reliable, and often cheaper connection.
I've experienced this firsthand, and the
difference is night and day. I made the
switch from Cox cable to fiber and is
cheaper, faster, and more reliable. So,
it's a win-win. Okay. Now, you'll need a
cable modem, DSL modem, or a fiber,
Buying A Modem/ONT and How It Works
depending on your ISP plan. A cable
modem or DSL modem connects your home to
the internet, acting as a gateway that
allows your devices to connect to the
online world. It translates digital
signals from your devices into signals
that can be transmitted over the
internet and vice versa. And this is
known as modulation and de modulation.
However, if you have fiber internet like
me, you'll need an
which stands for optical network
terminal. The translates light signals
from the fiber cable into electrical
signals that your router and devices can
understand. While an is not a modem, it
does serve a similar function. Most ISPs
will provide a modem for free or for
rent. In my experience, if the ISP wants
to rent you a modem, go ahead and buy
your own. It'll save you money in the
long run. That being said, I have Centry
Link Fiber and they provided my for
free, so it's a win-win. However, this
all depends upon the ISP that you
choose. Okay, step number three,
selecting the perfect wireless router.
10 Step Guide To Choosing the Perfect Wireless Router
Choosing the best wireless router is
crucial as it serves as the brain for
your home network. Here is a simplified
guide to help you make an informed
decision. First, you want to assess your
needs and consider how your network will
be used. more demanding activities will
require a more advanced router. Step
two, check the speed of the router to
make sure it supports the speeds of your
ISP plan. For instance, if you have a 2
gig fiber plan, make sure that router
supports 2 gig. And FYI, most basic
routers or mesh systems only have 1 gig
LAN ports. So, if you have a 2 gig
connection, those routers will not work.
Okay. The third step is determining will
you need Wi-Fi 6, Wi-Fi 6E, or Wi-Fi 7.
Once again, this will depend upon your
home network needs. While most homes can
get away with a Wi-Fi 6 router, many
high demand users will require Wi-Fi 6E
or Wi-Fi 7. So, for instance, if you buy
the latest phones and laptops, you may
want to consider Wi-Fi 6E or Wi-Fi 7.
And those speeds are very fast. And this
is due to the newer and faster 6 GHz
band. And these newer routers also
support MLO technology, which combines
all the bands together to form a faster
and more reliable connection.
All right, number four is coverage area.
You'll need to consider the size of your
home. For small homes, apartments, or
condos, a basic router will do just
fine. With large homes, or two-story
homes, or homes with basement, you'll
need a router with extendable range or
maybe a mesh system. You can also buy a
router without wireless capabilities and
just connect an AP somewhere in your
home, but that's for a different video
and that's a little bit more
complicated. Okay, number five is number
of devices. Think about how many devices
will connect to your network. All
wireless routers have connection limits,
so check the box. Okay. Number six is
security features. Ensure that your
router supports the latest security
protocol, WPA3, and older Wi-Fi 6
routers only support WPA2. If security
is a top priority for your home network,
then consider getting a Wi-Fi 6E or
Wi-Fi 7 router because these have WPA3
encryption. And guys and gals, please
consider subscribing to our channel
because all the cool kids are doing it.
Thanks. All right, number seven is ease
of use or user-friendly apps or web
interfaces. Look for easy setup and
management and keep it simple,
especially if you're a network beginner.
Okay, number eight is futurep proofing.
You may want to consider the latest
technology like Wi-Fi 6E or Wi-Fi 7
routers. This will ensure that your
router stays relevant even as technology
advances. If you tend to buy the latest
iPhones or Samsung's or laptops, you may
want to consider a Wi-Fi 6E or Wi-Fi 7
router. Okay, number nine is your
budget. How much are you willing to
spend on your router? And this step is
super easy. Just check in my description
below for the best deals on all routers.
And these are Amazon affiliate links
where I get a small commission. And this
small commission helps keep this channel
alive. Thanks. All right, number 10 is
reviews and ratings. Make sure to
thoroughly check their reviews and
ratings for the router you want to
purchase. In many cases, you will see
the same issue or problem in multiple
reviews, and that's a huge red flag. All
right, step number four. Let's connect
your brand new wireless router. Okay,
Connecting Your New Wireless Router
now you want to plug your brand new
router into your modem or using an
Ethernet cable. And you can use Cat 5e,
Cat 6, or Cat 6A. And just a heads up, I
get all of my Ethernet cables at
satmaxim.com. They have the best cables
at the best pricing. And they carry Cat
5e, Cat 6, Cat 7, and Cat 8. So make
sure to check out satmaxim.com
for all your cable needs. So connect one
end of the cable to the modem or and the
other end to the WAN port on the back of
the router. Do not connect to the LAN
port. Connect to the WAN port wide area
network. Next, you want to make sure
your router is centrally located in your
home and smack dab in the middle of the
house will be perfect to provide the
best range everywhere. So depending on
the distance from the modem to the
router, you may need a longer cable. For
example, in my network panel, there is
no router. I placed my router in the
center of the home for the best
coverage. And I simply ran two cables
from this panel up the wall through the
attic down another wall into the room.
And guys and gals, if you're liking this
kind of content, please give a thumbs up
and share it. High five. So, one cable
will go from the fiber into that room
and plugs into the WAN port on the
router. And then another cable goes from
the LAN port on the back of that router
back into the panel into a switch. And
this gives our panel internet
connectivity. Okay, step number five.
Configure Your New Router
Let's configure the router. All right,
there are two ways to configure your
brand new router. It's either wired or
wireless. For a wired connection,
connect your PC to the LAN port on the
back of the router. And then next, open
any web browser and type in the address
bar 1 192.168.1.1
or 1 192.168.0.1.
If those numbers don't work, look on the
back of the router for the IP address.
And then next, log into the router using
the default name and password which can
be found on the back of the router. And
once you log in, you want to change the
admin name and password. Now to connect
to your router wirelessly, download the
app for your specific brand like TPLink,
Netgear or ASUS. And for instance, the
ASUS app or TPLink app will
automatically find the router in your
network and then connect. And once
again, once you're logged in, change the
admin name and password. Okay, step
number six. Let's configure your
wireless network. So once you go into
Configure Your Wireless Networks
the admin screen, go into the wireless
settings. And now it's time to set up a
unique SSID, which is the network name.
From here, we're going to make some
changes. Depending on how many bands you
have, you can have a 2.4 GHz band SSID,
a 5 GHz band SSID, and even a 6 GHz band
SSID. And with the newer Wi-Fi 7
routers, there's MLO technology, which
means you can create an MLO SSID. And
when naming your SSID, don't make it too
personal. Don't use your last name or
your address. Next, you want to set a
strong and unique password. 12 to 16
characters or longer. And use a mix of
uppercase, lowercase, numbers, and
symbols. And just for context, it would
take over 200 years to hack this type of
password. So, the longer the better. All
right, step number seven. Let's connect
Connecting Your Devices
all your devices. So, connecting your
wireless devices to the network is super
easy. Just find your SSID and put in
your password and you're good to go.
Then repeat this process for all your
wireless devices. For wired devices like
PCs and gaming consoles, simply plug
them into the LAN port on the back of
the router. If you have more wired
devices than LAN ports on the back of
the router, then you'll have to buy a
switch. And you can see in my network
panel, I have two switches. I have a 10-
port switch and an eight port switch.
And the great thing about network
switches is they come in five port, 8
port, 10 port, even 24 ports. And that's
plenty of ports for all your wired
devices. And to make it even easier,
most switches are plug-and-play and
require no configuration. Okay, step
number eight. Let's test your network.
And we're going to use an online speed
Testing Your Network
test for both wireless and wired. For
wireless speeds, use your laptop or
phone to perform the test. There are
plenty of websites you can go to to
perform this test. Now, your wireless
speeds will not be as fast as your wired
speeds, and it also depends what band
you're connected to. The 2.4 GHz band is
much slower. So, I recommend that you
connect to the 5 GHz band when doing
this test. It's much faster. And if you
have the Wi-Fi 6E or Wi-Fi 7 router, you
can choose the 6 GHz band as well. And
since I have a Wi-Fi 7 router, I'm going
to speed test both the MLO band as well
as the 5 GHz band, and we'll see which
one is faster. All right, now it's time
for the allimp important speed test.
Let's start with the MLLO
and we'll hit go.
Maybe 700 megabits per second. Download
681
and upload. Pretty impressive, too.
761 upload.
Wow, very impressive. Let's try the
5 GHz band. Here we go. connect.
If I was a betting man, I would say it's
faster. Let's find out. Go.
So, we got 601 download megabits per
second and then we've got what for
upload?
We got 690 for upload. So, the MLO was
faster, but not by a whole lot. So, my
speed test proved that the ML low band
was faster than the 5 GHz band. That's
pretty impressive. And performing the
wired speed test is exactly the same.
Just go to your web browser and look for
a speed test website and then hit go.
And your wired speeds should be very
close to your max ISP speeds. If they
consistently fall way short of that,
then call your ISP. All right, the last
step is step number nine, securing your
Securing Your Home Network
home network. And this step is pretty
easy, but it's very important. The first
thing you want to do in your router is
make sure all the firewalls are turned
on. And like I said before, make sure
all your passwords are long, strong, and
unique. The longer the better. And if
your router has VPN capabilities, I
would definitely use it. And the last
thing I would do in your router is
change your DNS server. You have a
primary and a secondary. And I use the
family version of Cloudflare, which
blocks adult websites and malware. So
for your primary DNS, put 1.1.1.3.
and secondary is 1.0.0.3.
And just hit save. That's it. And now
your network is protected against
malware and adult websites. And there
you have it, guys. A comprehensive guide
to setting up your home network.
Remember, there are more advanced topics
like port forwarding, PoE connections,
and VLANs. But this guide covers the
basics.