Network Topologies:
Networks can connect to each other in many different ways.
And in this video, we're going to look
at a number of different network topologies
and how those different network topologies can be deployed
in an enterprise network.
This can be very useful during the planning process, where
you're designing the network.
It's also useful during the troubleshooting process
so that you can tell how different networks are connected
to other networks.
This is also useful during the troubleshooting process
so that you can visually see how one network might
connect to and send data to another network.
Let's start this conversation with one
of the most popular network topologies in use.
That would be a star network.
Sometimes you may hear this referred to
as a hub-and-spoke network.
This is what we use in most large networks
to connect devices together.
There's a central device that is used as the central networking
component.
And then everyone on the network is all
connecting to that same central device.
A good example of a star network,
or a hub-and-spoke network, is one
that we have with switched Ethernet.
Our Ethernet switch sits in the middle of the network.
And all of the other devices connect to that same Ethernet
switch.
If each of these spokes around the network
would like to communicate with each other,
they all must communicate through this central hub.
A mesh network design is when one location or device connects
to another location or device over more than one network
connection.
This means that we can have one link communicating to another.
And it might follow one path to get to that location.
Or it may follow an alternate path
to be able to get to that location.
One reason we design a network this way
is so that if one link in the mesh was to fail,
we can use one of the other links
to complete that communication.
We might also perform load balancing
over these links, where half of the data
is sent over one connection, and the other half of the data
is sent over a different connection.
Although we can certainly design mesh networks for local area
networks, we often see them deployed in wide area networks
so that we can maintain connectivity to a remote site
regardless of what network connection might be available.
If you were to look at a large enterprise network,
you would notice there are a number
of different architectures all being
used in different parts of the network.
And when we combine all of those together,
we've created a hybrid network.
One part of the network might be a star network.
Another part of the network may be point to point.
And a third part of the network might be a mesh network.
Once we combine all of these together,
we've created a hybrid architecture.
Many data centers take advantage of a spine and leaf
architecture.
This is where you would have individual switches
at the top that are the spine of the network.
There would be switches in the middle that are leaf networks.
And then you would have different devices
connect to the leaf.
You'll notice that the spine network is
connected to all of the leafs.
And the leafs are connected to each of the spines.
However, those leaf switches do not
connect directly to each other.
And the spine switches also do not
connect directly to each other.
This works very well for an architecture
we use in many data centers, known as top-of-rack switching.
In top-of-rack switching, every rack
has a leaf switch at the top of every physical rack.
We would then connect all of the physical devices in that rack
to the leaf switch that is at the top of that rack.
This keeps your cabling very simple
because all of your cabling is self-contained
within that same rack.
There is redundancy because you have this rack connected
to multiple spines.
This also increases the overall performance of the network
because we're no more than one switch away
from any other device in the data center.
If your data center only has a handful of racks,
this may be a relatively inexpensive way
to connect all of these devices together.
But when you have tens or hundreds or even
thousands of racks in a data center,
you would need a separate switch for every rack.
And of course, the cost of that will increase for each rack
you have in the network.
When looking around the network, you
may find some wide area network connections
that are point to point.
And as the name implies, there is a single point
connected to a single point.
This was a very common design on older wide area
networks, where you would use something
like a T1 or a T3 connection.
We refer to those as point-to-point T1
or point-to-point T3.
We might also use this design in local area networks.
If you work on a campus, you can connect one building
to another over two connections.
And the connection between those two buildings
would be a point-to-point connection.